Good afternoon everyone.
Welcome to the third and final Quartz
Composer session during this WWDC.
My name is Pierre-Olivier Latour
and I'm the Engineering Manager for
Quartz Composer at Apple.
In this session,
titled "Advanced Techniques of
Quartz Composer," we are going
to learn a number of things.
First of all,
like the title of that session implies,
a number of advanced techniques
using either the QC view or
the QC renderers and how to do
low-level rendering of compositions.
But then the biggest part of
that session is going to be
how to write your own patches,
so we'll have a deep look at that.
Through that session I'm going
to assume a number of things
that you are already familiar
with the Quartz Composer concept,
which would be fine if you have
already played with it or if you
went to either a session this
morning or the one yesterday.
I'm going to assume you have the
basics of OpenGL as well as the
basics of the Objective C 2.0 and the
changes that went into that language.
So let's start with advanced techniques.
First of all, the QC view.
Well, the QC view is the easiest way
for you to display Quartz Composer
contents inside your application.
The way it works is it's pretty much
an autonomous view that's driven by a
timer that's running on the main thread,
and every x number of times per second,
it's going to render a new frame.
So because the QC view is kind
of living in its own world,
the question becomes how to
best interact with the rendering
that's happening in a QC view.
In part,
we're introducing a new method that's
called "renderAtTimeArguments".
That method is only for
subclasses of the QC view,
so you don't want to call that directly.
And when you subclass QC view
and override that method,
you do not want to modify the time
or arguments parameters when passing
them to the super implementation.
So what's the point of that new method?
Well, it's to cover two usage cases
when you want to interface
tightly with the QC view.
It's either to do
synchronized communication,
when talking and retrieving
results from the QC view,
or if you want to even add
your own OpenGL rendering
as underlays or overlays.
So let's look at the
synchronized communication.
What does that exactly mean?
Well, remember, in the QC view,
the composition is rendering its own
world and its own rate and so on.
So the problem becomes,
what if you want to set some input
parameters of the composition,
but you want to set it for every frame?
So the way you would do it in
Tiger is by probably having your
own timer that's running a little
faster than the one of the QC view,
say, 70 hertz or something like that.
And then you would end up setting
the parameters all the time,
but it wouldn't be synchronous.
So the idea here is that you
can now know precisely when the
QC view is about to render a frame,
and therefore set your input
parameters only when necessary
and only at that time.
And then it renders,
and you retrieve the result.
So let's look at an example.
You subclass QC view.
You override the renderAtTime
arguments method.
And the first thing you do is
you're going to call super so
that the QC view is not broken
and actually performs rendering.
But then before calling super,
you can call a set value for input key
and set your input parameters at that
time just before rendering happens.
Then rendering happens,
and you can retrieve the results.
So it's pretty straightforward.
A more interesting and let's
say more powerful use of that is
if you want to add some custom
OpenGL overlays or underlays combined
with the rendering in the QC view.
A couple of restrictions there.
First of all,
we're going to do OpenGL drawing
and the current context does matter.
Instead of changing the current
context to the one that the QCV uses,
it's simpler and more efficient
to just use the CGL macros.
So there'll be more in a minute.
A golden rule to follow
when you work inside Quartz
Composer and do OpenGL code,
and we're going to repeat that a few
times throughout the presentation,
is make sure you save/restore
the state you change.
Open--Quartz Composer is
tightly integrated with OpenGL.
OpenGL is a giant state machine.
If you change the states and
you don't restore them properly
to what they were before,
then the whole system end up
in an inconsistent state and
your rendering is not correct.
And finally, you want to make sure you
check for OpenGL errors.
So here's what it means.
In that case, we subclass QCVue,
override render at time like
in the previous example.
You will notice at the top of the--of
that example sample code that there is
the inclusion of that CGL macro file,
which basically is going
to make it so that whenever
you call an OpenGL function,
it will be targeted to the context,
to a specific OpenGL context that's
defined by the variable CGL_CTX.
And it's basically a bunch of
preprocessor macros that expand.
And this way, you don't have to touch at
all the current context.
You don't have to try to set it,
to restore it, anything like that.
It's very straightforward.
You just retrieve the context
that the QCVue uses by doing,
in that case, self OpenGL context,
and then CGL context object to retrieve
the underlying CGL context object.
And then every OpenGL code you're
going to put there from that point
on will be sent to that context.
So about the OpenGL code,
so here's an example that
would just draw a red quad.
Remember what I said
that was very important.
You want to save, restore the steps.
So the first step at the top
is saving the current step
that we're about to change,
changing them, then perform the drawing,
restore the original steps.
instead and handle any errors.
Another thing we added to the QC view
in Leopard is the ability to retrieve
directly the image that it's rendered.
It's very straightforward as well.
All you have to do is call on the QC view
you want to retrieve the rendering,
create snapshot image of type.
And what's great about that method
is you can specify a number of types.
So you specify the type as a string,
which can be for instance
NSBitmapImageRep or
could be CVPixelBuffer.
That method would take care of
downloading the image from the GPU and
flipping it vertically if necessary,
because the OpenGL rendering on a
GPU usually happens upside down,
so you don't even have to deal with that.
It will provide you directly an object
ready to be used in the format you want.
Now you've got to be careful because that
method starts with "create" for a reason.
It means it's going to return
you a brand new object.
It's not an auto-release,
it's not on the auto-release pool,
so make sure you call "release" on it
or the appropriate CF release type,
whatever it is for the image type.
And you will also want to make sure
for best performances to ask for the
type that is best suited for what
you're going to do with it afterwards.
So for example,
if what you want to do is get the image,
pass it further to QuickTime, well,
QuickTime,
like the compression session APIs,
they're typically using CVPixel buffers.
So you ask for a CVPixel buffer.
If you were to pass it to Core Image,
you would ask for CI Image and so on.
One of those cases is I want to pass
the rendered image to another QC view
or QC render or something like that.
The best type you can use in that case
is CVOpenGL buffer because it is a
buffer that is on the GPU and therefore
your content will stay on the GPU.
There is no extra download and
then upload that would be done.
I'll show you a quick demo
of some of those features.
[Transcript missing]
showcasing those two features,
you can see here,
I got a basic composition
with an Apple logo,
and I can just rotate it like that,
do some inertia in the logo.
Well, here, that red frame could be,
for example,
a set frame area in the video world.
And that is drawn by a few lines
of OpenGL code that were inserted
after the drawing of the QC view.
So it's completely synchronous
with the rendering of the QC view.
Now, you can see here I also
have a secondary window,
which has a timer,
and it's simply an NSImageView inside.
The timer fires 10 times per second.
Take a snapshot of the main
view and put it as an NSImage
inside the NSImageView here.
So it's really simple to do overlay
rendering or underlay or grabbing
snapshots from the QC view.
Back to slides please.
[Transcript missing]
So like I said earlier,
you can interleave the rendering of the
QC renderer with your own OpenGL code,
which allows interesting
underlays and overlays as well.
In that case, you can see that I took
the same loop as before,
but I added a bit of
OpenGL code before and after,
where you would draw
some kind of background,
then you draw the composition.
Obviously,
we're assuming here that the composition
is not covering the whole drawing area.
Otherwise,
it's pointless to draw something before.
And then you can draw some
overlay with some GL code.
If you want to communicate with the
compositions through the QC renderer,
it's the same exact set of
methods as on the QC view.
So, set value for input key will set an
input parameter on the composition.
Value for output key will retrieve an
output result from the composition.
Now, regarding the arguments you can pass
when you call renderer time arguments,
there are two of them and
they're completely optional.
The first one is QC renderer event key.
If you have an NS event around,
because your QC renderer,
the result is being displayed
in Windows or something and then
you have NS events flowing in,
you should pass it in to the
QC renderer when you call renderer time,
pass only the current event.
And this will allow patches
that depend on events,
for example,
the keyboard or the mouse to work
properly for the mouse clicks and such.
If another optional argument is
passing the current mouse location,
so the way we do that here is
you put the mouse location as an
NS point stored inside an NS value
and the coordinate system for the
mouse must be normalized 01 to 01.
A great thing about the QC Renderer
is that you can do offline rendering.
You could have a custom thread that's
a separate thread from the main thread
that's rendering composition in the
background or something like that.
Or you can just have a common line
tool that's rendering composition
directly to a bunch of TIFF files,
things like that.
Well, we made it easier in Leopard where
there is a new method on QC Renderer
called InitOffScreenWithSize,
Colorspace and File.
So what it does is taking care completely
of creating the OpenGL context,
the P buffer to render on the GPU,
all of that, you don't even need to
know about how it works.
You just use it.
You specify a file, a color space.
You can even pass null instead of a
color space to get the default one,
and you're good to go.
Now,
that rendering still happens on a GPU,
always happens on a GPU,
which means you cannot render at size
that won't be supported on a GPU,
for example, like 16,000 by 10,000.
That wouldn't work.
Typically, the size limitation is 2K,
2K on the current hardware.
But-- most of the machines we're shipping
today are probably more than 4K and 4K.
And depending on the amount
of VRAM you will have around,
the rendering will
happen more or less fast.
I would like to now look at a
very interesting possibility
we added in Mac OS X Leopard,
which is the ability to do
chaining of compositions.
The idea behind that is that instead
of having a big monolithic composition
with a ton of patches inside,
you divide it into a set of
primary composition and then a
bunch of sub-compositions that
are well-defined and that you load
dynamically into the first one.
So that was not possible in
Mac OS X Tiger and you can now do
that in Leopard using a new patch
that's called the Composition Loader.
So let's do a demo of that.
[Transcript missing]
The Quartz Composer is a powerful
visual programming tool for using
graphics and animation on the Mac.
With Quartz Composer you can easily
explore the graphics stack in Mac OS X.
Mac OS X Leopard brings a number
of new APIs as well as the ability
to write custom ""patches""
for use in your compositions,
allowing you to take Quartz Composer
further than it's ever gone before.
We'll demonstrate this new technology
as well as advanced API techniques
for integrating Quartz Composer
technology into your applications,
allowing you to take Quartz Composer
together with your computer.
is applying some kind of neon effect
to an input image and you can also
pick the color of that neon effect.
What I want to do now is build a
new composition from scratch that
puts these two sub-compositions
into this master one.
So let me organize that quite a bit.
Okay, so what we need is that new patch
called the Composition Loader.
I'm going to create an instance of it.
The first thing you expect from
it is the ability to specify the
composition to actually render,
and there is an input for that,
composition location,
which will accept the file path, the URL,
usual things.
So let's take that gradient composition.
It's loaded and now it's rendering here.
However, that would be pretty limited
if you were only able to load
composition and render them.
What we want to do as well is
communicate with the inputs
and outputs and we can do that.
If you display the inspector for
the new composition loader patch,
go to the settings pane.
You can configure a kind of
template with the inputs and
outputs of the composition.
If I look again at the
gradient composition,
there is one input and
the key is "image."
So here in the settings of that patch,
I'm going to say I have an image
of type-- I have a-- sorry,
an input of type image
with the key image.
Create that.
You can see the image is
now available as an input.
And I can take my Apple logo
and connect it there.
And it just works.
Now,
what would exactly happen if I were to
load a composition that doesn't have an
image input with the key input image?
Well, nothing.
I mean, you wouldn't get an error.
It wouldn't get connected.
So you can see the inputs and outputs
that you define on the compositor,
on the composition loader,
as kind of a weak template
of inputs and outputs.
If the composition that's loaded has
one or more of those inputs and outputs,
they will automatically get connected,
and you can talk to those
inputs and outputs through the
inputs and outputs of the patch.
If they don't exist, well, no big deal.
You don't get errors.
It doesn't crash or anything like that.
Now let's insert our effect,
the neon effect.
I'm going to create
another Composition Loader,
and in that case we also
have something interesting,
which is
We don't want that neon effect to render.
We want it to be inserted between
the Apple logo image and the
image that's displayed in the
second composition loader here.
So let's look at the settings.
And you can see that the top
setting is the type of patches.
So remember, there are several types of
patches in Quartz Composer--
three to be precise-- processor,
consumer, and provider.
And obviously, the system,
when it loads a composition from disk,
the type definitely matters.
So in our case,
we are going to use that neon
composition as a processor with
the input image and color inputs.
And it also has an output,
which we can see by
looking at the composition.
Because right now,
we don't have a way to display
the outputs on the viewer.
We only display the inputs in that area.
You can see it has a published output,
which has the key output image.
So I can go back here,
set the execution mode to processor,
and now I can define inputs and outputs
because consumers have that particularity
that they're not allowed to have outputs.
So now the two sets are
visible and I can add--
An image input with the key input
"image", an image output with
the key output "image". Let's
specify the composition location.
[Transcript missing]
So as you can imagine,
that opens the door to pretty
powerful possibilities.
And as a demonstration of that,
for those of you who
were present last year,
there was this hands-on
session that I gave where,
at the end,
we were building a fact TV system
that was called the QC TV.
And it's a sample code that you
can get from the ADC website.
The way it was implemented is that
there were a number of composition
for each part of the TV setup,
where you have one composition that
handles the crawler at the bottom,
another one that renders the
upper bar with the logo and such.
Each of them was a different composition.
And then in the source code,
there was a QC renderer for
each of the composition.
And everything was put
together in an OpenGL context.
Well, now doing the sensing
would be a lot simpler,
because I have here a composition
folder with all the sub-compositions,
which is really convenient when you
want to have artists or programmers
work on separate composition
without having everyone touching
on that big master composition.
So it gives you granularity.
It gives you an easy way to
replace sub-compositions.
And here,
it's really a bunch of composition
loaders that are configured with
the proper inputs and outputs.
And now, on the code side,
you would simply have one QC renderer or
one QC view to be able to render that,
instead of having a number of
QC renderers and do all the logic to
render them in a proper order and such.
So that would simplify
your life quite a bit.
Let's go back to the slides, please.
Now it's time to get down and
dirty with the real thing,
which is writing your own patches.
This has been the number
one developer request,
as you can imagine,
so the nice thing about it is that, yes,
it does make sense for you
to send all your requests and
bugs to bugreport@apple.com
and it actually works,
so we listen to them.
We wanted it,
that ability to write custom patches,
simple and powerful like
the rest of Quartz Composer,
which concretely means we wanted it
easy to be able to manage your set of
inputs and outputs on the custom patch,
easy to make, to do image processing or
OpenGL rendering or even provide a
custom user interface to edit kind of
the internal settings of your patch.
So to achieve that goal,
we actually built completely
a custom patch mechanism
on top of Objective-C 2.0,
which as a side effect implies that
those custom patches that you write
will only work on Mac OS X Leopard.
Let me introduce you to that
new class called the QC plugin.
This is the base class for
writing your custom patches.
It is itself a subclass of NSObject.
And the way it's going to work is that
you subclass in turn the QCPlugin class.
You implement one or more-- you implement
or override one or more methods,
the one you need,
define the inputs and outputs,
implement how exactly the
patch executes and so on.
And then you end up with a
plugin that you can put at the
appropriate location on disk.
It gets loaded inside Quartz Composer
and turns into a custom patch.
There are a few requirements
when you write custom patches.
The first of them is that, obviously,
you want to be a good citizen and your
custom patch must be able to have-- well,
let's say your QC plugin subclass
must be able to generate multiple
instances of those custom patches.
And that's really a requirement.
The other one is that you've got
to be able to write code that
is going to work on any thread.
We're not talking about reentrant code.
But we're talking about code that
doesn't matter if it's executed
on the main thread or a background
thread or those kind of things.
In the same direction,
you also need to make code that works
if you don't have a run loop around.
So for some system services,
the way they work is they require
a run loop to be able to post
notifications and things like that.
If you want to use those APIs inside
one of your custom patches,
you will likely need to
spin off a custom thread.
And then in that thread,
have a run loop and then
communicate with the patch.
Here are the basics of
the QC plugin class.
So you subclass it,
and then the first two methods you are
likely to implement are attributes,
which is called so that the
system can retrieve the name,
description, and so on for the UI.
And if you need to,
you can implement init and dialog,
which are the way the plugin
instances are created.
Now the important thing is how
do those custom patches execute?
Well, there are a number of methods
on the QC plugin class that
you implement whenever needed.
You will notice that there is a
certain symmetry in those methods.
So what happened is
when the engine starts,
start execution is called
on your plugin instance.
When the engine shuts down,
stop execution is called.
When your patch starts being
used by the engine because
somebody's pulling data from it,
pulling, let's say, results from it,
then enable execution is called.
And when nobody needs the data anymore,
for example, for several minutes before
it's being used again,
disable execution is called.
And at the core of it,
we have the execute method,
which is called by the engine whenever
results are needed from your patch.
You will have likely noticed that all
those methods were taking a parameter
that was an opaque object complying
to the QC plugin context protocol.
That protocol defines the
number of methods that you can
use to get information about
the rendering destination,
like obviously the bounds,
the color space,
and the OpenGL context to render to it,
as well as a couple utilities so that you
can send a message to the Quartz Composer
log or store some user information.
The interest of that user information
method is that this mutable
dictionary is shared between
all your instances that are running
in the same Quartz Composer context.
So that's a great way if you need to
do caching that is shared between your
various instances in the same context
to use the user info dictionary.
You want to be careful.
Do not retain that
QC plugin context object.
Do not make calls to it outside of
the scope of those execution methods.
It's really a dedicated object for that,
for only being used inside
the execution methods.
So the core execution,
like I mentioned earlier,
is all about that execute method.
So remember, in Course Composer,
we have patches.
Those custom patches are going
to execute in the environment
of the QC plugin context.
They get their input parameters.
You read the values.
So that means reading the
values from the input port.
Then you do computations in your
execute method to build the result.
You can also take the time
into account if necessary.
And finally,
you output those results to the
output ports of of your patch,
or you render it to the destination.
There are two more things we need
to define regarding execution.
Like I mentioned earlier
with the CompositionLoader,
those three types of patches, Provider,
Processor, and Consumer,
are fairly important to the system.
So you need to implement the plus
execution method in your class to define
what's the execution mode for your patch.
So as a reminder here,
providers are the ones that are executed
whenever their outputs are needed,
but no more than once per frame.
Processors are kind of the lazy patches.
They're only executed when
their input change and their
output change are needed.
Or the consumer always are the one
putting the data from the two others,
and they're pretty much always executed.
You also need to specify the
time dependency of the patch.
Three cases.
Either your patch doesn't care
about the time at all in its execute
method-- it just ignores the parameter,
so the type is none-- or it
can definitely take the time
into account its computation,
so you would say the
patch has a time base.
Or there is kind of an intermediate
case where you have some patches
that just need some idle time,
because it could be a provider patch
that's connected to some hardware,
and you want to make sure it
pulls data from it whenever
it's needed by the engine.
So you don't truly depend on time,
but you need some idling going on.
So that's the kind of a special
case that is defined by the
KQC plugin timeModeIdle.
But it's pretty rare.
You shouldn't use that very often.
So we define how the patches execute,
when they get executed, and so on.
The last thing we need to look at is,
well,
how do I define my inputs and outputs?
So we're completely leveraging
the Objective-C 2.0 properties.
And the way we do that is if you define
a property of your subclass whose name
starts with input and output and whose
type is one of the supported types,
then we automatically turn that into
an input and output-- or output,
sorry-- on the patch.
So for instance,
you can see here I have a dynamic
property called input value one,
double, and that will turn into an input
port on your patch with the key
input value one and of type number.
So the same thing for input value two,
and it's pretty much the same thing
for an output result property.
You still need to define--
it's not mandatory,
but it would be nice for the UI--
that to provide some description for
your inputs and outputs so that when
you're in a Quartz Composer editor,
you see a normal name instead
of saying input value one.
So for that,
you override the method attributes
for property port with key,
and that will get called by the system.
And it will pass, for instance,
input value one,
and you can return a dictionary that
contains the name and the default value,
those kind of things.
How do you read and write
to those property ports?
Well,
the beauty of Objective-C 2.0 is that
it becomes completely transparent.
You want to read from one
of those property ports,
input value one.
You just access it like if
it was an IVAR of your class.
It's that transparent.
It will automatically make
a round trip to the port,
query the value, and return it,
as if you were using an IVAR.
If you want to write to an output,
it's the exact same mechanism.
So there is a little
thing to be aware of.
It's definitely more expensive
than reading and writing to an
IVAR because of that round trip
to the input or output port.
So if you have a loop,
like a for loop or any kind of loop,
it is definitely recommended to actually
cache the value before you do that loop
and use the cached value in the loop.
As a hint,
what you may do in your code is instead
of typing input value one in your source
code to read or write to a property port,
you can do self.inputValue1.
It works exactly the same.
But in that case,
when you read your code again later,
it will remind you, oh,
I'm actually not reading
and writing to an IVAR here.
I'm accessing a property of myself.
And therefore,
if you see self.foo inside a loop,
then you know you should
move that out of the loop.
Now,
not all patches want to have a pretty
fine number of inputs and outputs.
So obviously, we provide a way for you to
add custom inputs and outputs.
And it's pretty straightforward.
You call addInputPortWithType.
The type is going to be, for example,
Boolean, string number,
those kind of things.
And then the key to use for the port,
as well as optional attributes,
which are the same attributes as
the EWD return for property ports,
like name, default value,
those kind of things.
And it's the exact same
mechanism to create output ports.
Because those are not property ports,
when you want to read and write to them,
you need to go through
an explicit method.
And it's called valueForInputKey,
or it's called setValueForOutputKey
to write to the outputs.
Here's a detailed list.
And you can see on the left column,
the first one, the type of port in the
course of the world,
for example, Color.
You can see the type of the
Objective-C 2.0 property that is
required so that your property
turns into a Color port.
In that case, that will be CG ColorRef.
If you create it directly
by calling addInputPort,
the type would be the
QC Port Type Color constant.
And if you were to talk to
it using setValueForInputKey,
valueForOutputKey,
the type you would get is CG ColorRef.
You may notice here that we're taking a
break from the usual Course Commoder API,
which are really flexible.
And they would typically
allow you to pass an NSColor,
a CI Color, a CG Color,
pretty much anything.
Well, the idea here is that the code
you write is executing inside
the Course Commoder Engine.
So for performance reasons,
we need to make sure we minimize
the number of conversions.
And if we allow people to write
a patch that take an NSColor,
the next one that takes a CI Color, well,
we would need to convert
that all the time,
which might still be OK for colors,
but as you can imagine, for images,
it would be pretty expensive.
So we have restricted it to one type of
object per type of Course Commoder Port.
The last thing we need to do is when we
build our plugin to package it somewhere,
and QC plugins, you simply put them into
standard Cocoa bundles.
The only specificity they're going
to have is a special entry in
the Info.plist of the bundle that
list the subclasses of QC plugin
that you have in that bundle.
Then you put that plugin
in the proper location,
library graphics,
course composer plugins.
You cannot put them in the
tilde library graphics,
they won't get loaded here.
Only library graphics,
because we want for security reasons,
have administrator only have the
rights to install those plugins.
Or you can also load the plugins
directly from inside your application
if for whatever reason you don't
want to install the plugin and
make it available for everyone.
So you can either load a
plugin from an arbitrary pass,
or you can have the code mixed
with your application code and
just called registerPluginClass,
class being a subclass of QC plugin.
One thing I did not mention here
is that even if you install your
custom plugin at the proper location,
that doesn't mean it's going to
get loaded in all environments.
Because in WebKit, for example,
we have to have restrictions
for security reasons as well,
and we're not allowed to load any
kind of patch in a web environment.
So your custom plugins won't get loaded.
But for regular clients,
from the editor to applications
you write or anything else,
they will get loaded.
So in a theory for now,
it's time to build our first patch.
And what I'm going to build
here is a very simple patch to
demonstrate all the best principles,
something that I call the "iPatch,"
which is kind of a marketing tool
where you start with a regular name
and you end up with an "i" name.
So it's very simple.
Input string, output string,
pure string manipulation.
OK, thank you.
So we start in Xcode and
we create a new project.
There are two templates for
Quartz Composer plugins.
The one we're going to use,
the simplest one, Quartz Composer Plugin,
that's the name.
Those templates are not in the
Leopard seed that you currently have.
We'll upload them on the ADC website or
the WWDC website as soon as possible,
so likely later this
week or the week after,
so that you can download them
and put them at the proper
location so they appear in Xcode.
So let's go ahead and create what
we call the eyepatch project.
And let's start by looking at
the structure of the template.
So we have on the left side the series
of files that are used by default.
Here are your two files that
define the subclass of QC plug-in.
Then you have your usual prefix
file so that it compiles faster,
which includes by default
here the Quartz framework,
which in turn includes all
the Quartz Composer APIs.
Then we only need two frameworks,
the Quartz framework, Abusely,
and then the Cocoa framework.
Now if we look more precisely
at the ipatchplugin.h file,
so pretty straightforward, remember,
subclass of QC plug-in
and called ipatchplugin.
First thing I'm going to do is add those
input properties we talked about so much.
So we need two properties to define
the input string and the output string.
So the type would be NSString.
First name would be input string.
And then let me create another one
that's of type NSString as well,
except it's called output string.
That's all we need to do so far.
Then we can look at the
.m implementation file.
So by default,
it's pretty much a placeholder.
And you just have to fill your code
at the proper places if you want to.
You can see the structure here.
Every method is implemented,
except it does nothing or
returns the default value.
So you can either delete
the one you don't need,
or you can leave them as is.
It won't make a difference.
So let's start at the top of the file.
First thing I'm going to do is
change the description of the patch,
which is conveniently defined
as a preprocessor constant.
So let's say a patch that
converts any name to an iname.
OK.
The attributes here are defined
directly through the preprocessor
constants we have there,
so we don't need to touch that method.
Then remember, it would be nice to define
for the UI attributes for
the inputs and output ports.
So let's look for the key output string.
And if we have a match,
then let's return a
dictionary that contains
A UI name for that input part.
So the key would be
"nameKey" and the name,
let's say, "name".
Now if the key is input string,
we're going to do a little more than
return an ""m". We're also going to
define the default value to have on that
part when your patch instance is created.
So let's see,
dictionary with object and keys.
And my first object is
going to be "iName".
"It's going to be the official
name of our port in the UI.
Then we're going to
have some default value.
And that's pretty much it.
And default value,
I'm going to define that
to a conveniently pod.
Execution mode,
that patch is a processor,
just like data in, data out,
nothing to change.
This is what we have by default,
processor.
Time mode, nothing to change at all.
That our patch doesn't
depend on the time.
We don't have anything
to do in inter-dialog.
We don't need global resources
or anything like that.
We can skip it.
We don't care to know when
the engine is starting,
stopping, or enable execution,
so we don't touch any of those methods,
we leave them as is, doing nothing.
And the only one where we need to do
something is in the execute method.
So remember, in execute,
you take your inputs, process them,
produce some result on the outputs.
So our output is output string,
so you can just write to it,
and we're going to
have that ising happen,
so
"String by Append in
String" input string.
And to make it even better,
we're going to capitalize
the input string.
OK.
Now, we are almost ready to build.
Let me tell you first that by default,
the Active executable is the course
composer editing environment,
so that's pretty nice,
you don't even need to add it.
You can build a debug and release,
that's configured.
We also provide, as a convenience,
a secondary target,
that's called build and copy.
So typically,
if you don't use that target,
you build your patch,
and then it's in the build directory,
but it's not going to get loaded
by course composer because it's
not located in the appropriate
course composer plug-ins.
So at that point,
you would either manually copy it there,
or you would put a symlink,
something like that.
To avoid that annoying operation,
that target is simply
calling the normal target,
and after, run a script phase that copies
the built result directly into the
course composer plug-ins folder.
So let's build.
Pierre-Olivié Latour: OK.
Now I can look into the Quartz
Composer plugins folder,
which is located into library graphics,
and my """patch"" is there.
So let's launch -- well,
actually I need to quit it and relaunch.
There we go.
And I already have -- let's see,
a composition to host.
Here we go, my new patch.
Just zoom on that.
What this composition does is it
has simply an image with string to
generate the image with some string
on it and display it on a billboard.
Very straightforward.
And now I can look for my eye patch.
Whoops, not too fast.
Create an instance of it connected there.
You can see the name is proper, iname,
name.
The default value is-- let's
wait for the tool tip-- is pod.
And so the result is iPod,
but it definitely works.
So I can type book, and you get iBook,
and you can even invent
completely new products like
chair or whatever and get iChair.
So it's very simple to
implement that plugin.
And we almost type no code,
thanks to Objective-C 2.0.
Back to the slides, please.
So that was a very basic
demo just to make sure you
understand the principles there.
Now we're going to go a bit further and
do some interesting OpenGL rendering.
So what are the conditions here?
Well, first of all,
your QCplugin subclass is going
to have to be of type consumer,
because they're the only ones which
can render to the destination.
If you have a processor or provider,
that won't work.
Now, the same way we have those OpenGL,
let's say, good citizenship rules,
they also apply when you
write custom batches,
which means use cgl macros instead of
touching the current OpenGL context,
and make sure you save
restore all your OpenGL steps,
except the one that are part
of the GL current bit state.
So that basically means the
current vertex position,
current vertex color,
current vertex texture coordinates,
because everyone is changing them anyway,
so there is no point in
saving or restoring them.
So here's what the execute
method of your patch that does
OpenGL rendering would look like.
Remember,
you included the top OpenGL cglmacros.h
to get the cglmacros.
And then the first thing we would do in
execute is retrieve the OpenGL context
to render with and assign it to
a variable with the name cgl_ctx.
So we simply do that by calling
the cglcontext object method
on the context parameter.
For extra safety here,
you can always check--
that should never be null,
but you can always do if it's null,
return null, fail execution.
Then you insert your gl code.
Exact same thing as the example for
the QC renderer and the QC view.
Save the current state,
change the one you want to the
values you're interested in,
then perform your OpenGL rendering,
restore the states,
check and handle errors.
Really straightforward.
Well, the next question becomes, "Okay,
I can do OpenGL rendering,
but what about images?
I would like to draw images, obviously,
or get images from the system." So the
way you use images within QC Plugin
is by dealing with OPEC objects.
There are two OPEC objects.
The first one is called--
I use a protocol that is
QC Plugin Input Image Source,
and the second one is QC Plugin
Output Image Provider.
The reasons we use protocols
there is because we have
numerous image types in the OS,
you know, NSEmage, NSEbitmapRef,
CGImageRef, and so on,
and each of them is really
suited to a given usage,
and Quartz Composer is
a really generic system,
so none of those was really fitting,
and so by picking one of them,
it would have a number of
restrictions to deal with,
or by, on the contrary,
allowing any of them,
then we would have to deal with, again,
impedance mismatch,
which can be really expensive.
So we solved that problem,
and the nice thing we get as a
side effect is that we can defer,
through those protocols,
as you're gonna see in a minute,
all computation until it's really needed.
So that improves-- improves performance.
First thing, input images.
Like I said earlier,
those are OPEC objects that simply comply
to the QC plugin input image source.
The way you would create input
image ports is either through
Objective-C 2.0 properties,
where the type would be ID because it's
a generic object and then a protocol,
or it would be dynamic ports
where you can just create them
calling self-add-input-port,
where the type would
be QC port type image.
Now you have those images,
you have those ports,
you get images through them.
How do you access the pixels
to do something with them?
Well,
we use what we call representations.
There are two types of representation.
The first one is on the CPU.
So the idea here is that when you want
to access the contents of the image,
the actual pixels,
on the CPU you call log buffer
representation with pixel format
on the OPEC object and you specify
one of the supported formats
right now that can be RGB8,
RGBF for 32 bits float,
or intensity 8 or intensity float.
And in case of success
it will return yes,
which theoretically should
always be successful,
unless you already logged the image
in a different format obviously.
But at that point on, you have the image,
the pixels of the image accessible
in the buffer on the CPU.
So you can call regular methods like,
you know, buffer pixel wide,
buffer pixel high,
and the usual base address and byte
sparrows to read from the pixels.
Finally, when you're done,
you simply have to call unlock
pixel buffer represent unlock
buffer representation to
release that representation.
You cannot have multiple
representation at a time.
You need to unlock the current
one and relock a new one.
The pixel buffer is read only,
so it's very important you
don't touch that memory.
Only for reading.
The second case is accessing
the input images on a GPU.
It's pretty much a similar mechanism,
except instead of locking a
pixel buffer in CPU memory,
you're going to lock a texture.
And you can specify the target,
which can be 2D or rectangle.
If you specify 2D and the actual image
does not have power of two dimensions,
it will be automatically resized to fit.
So you will get your 2D texture,
which will allow you to do repeat and
various operations that can only be
done on 2D textures at the expense
of a potential quality loss because
of the rescaling that had happened to
get a 2D texture out of a non-power
of two-texture original image.
Once it is locked as a texture,
it's the usual stuff.
You can get the width, the height,
the target again, as well as the name,
obviously.
As a conveniency,
and also the fact if the contents
inside a texture is flipped or not,
vertically flipped.
As a conveniency,
we provide a texture matrix.
The idea here is that if
you get a rectangle texture,
you have to express the texture
coordinates in pixels versus the regular,
let's say,
normalized units that you use for 1D, 2D,
and 3D textures.
Also, if the texture content is flipped,
you would need to flip your texture
coordinates to take that into account.
Well,
you can do all that transparently and
always have to deal with unflipped,
normalized texture coordinates
just by loading a texture matrix
on the OpenGL texture matrix stack.
And then your coordinates
are sent through that matrix,
which will do the proper transform
before producing the texture coordinates,
producing the real coordinates
to use for the texture.
You don't have to use that mechanism,
but it simplifies your life if you do.
So we provide a code that will
return a texture matrix that
you can directly load on OpenGL.
If there is no need for a texture matrix,
this will return null.
The same way you cannot modify the
contents of the pixel buffer on a CPU,
you cannot modify the
content of the texture.
Then the third case to look at is
producing images out of the plugin.
So once again, we have an OPEC object,
which is going to have to comply to
the QC plugin output image provider.
But you're the one creating that object,
so you can return any object as long
as it conforms to that protocol.
The way you would create
output ports for output images,
exact same thing as for input images,
Objective-C 2.0 properties,
or dynamic ports.
So let's look a bit closer at that
protocol output image provider.
So it's going to--your
OPEC object that you return,
that you built and return,
which complies to that protocol,
is going to be curated by the
engine whenever necessary.
And it's going to be responsible
for providing pixels for
the image on the CPU,
on the GPU.
So it's the inverse mechanism that
getting image in your plug-in.
There are two methods that
are generic on that protocol,
just the dimensions of your image,
pixel wide and pixels high.
Then, once again, two cases, CPU and GPU.
In case of CPU,
your provider object is called,
and the engine is going to ask what are
your supported buffer pixel formats?
So if you're able to
draw your image into,
let's say, an RGB8 format,
you will return RGB8.
If you can support more than one format,
you return more than one in SNES array,
and you can order them
by order of preferences.
If you don't support rendering in CPU,
then just return an MTRR or NIL.
If that condition passes,
then the engine is going to call when
it actually needs the actual pixels,
render to buffer,
giving you a base address and
a row bytes and the actual
pixel format of that buffer.
And at that point,
you just access the buffer and write
to it and put your pixels in there.
In the case of producing
pixels for the image on a GPU,
it's pretty similar.
Pierre-Olivié Latour as well say,
I'd like to render into a
floating point buffer on the GPU,
if that's possible.
So that's the point of that method,
support a drawable pixel format.
Because we're in the OpenGL world,
to be able to render,
you might also require from
the OpenGL context a number
of extensions to be supported.
So you can check for those,
and return yes,
if you can work with that context.
And finally,
if the above conditions are met,
render with CGL context is called.
The context is ready to
be used with CGL macros,
as you can see, and you just draw,
and the viewport is already set,
and so on.
The projection and model view
matrices are set to identity.
You just render.
Remember, very important,
preserve the stats you change, always.
And at that point, you're done.
So you don't have to implement
both CPU and GPU method,
but obviously,
you need to implement one of them.
So let's do a demo of OpenGL rendering.
In that case I'm not going to build a
patch because there is a bit more code,
especially GL code,
so I'm going to show you a
project that's already written.
OK, so this is our usual plug-in project.
The difference here is the inputs
and outputs and the execution method
compared to the previous one we wrote.
So you can see here dynamic properties
that define the inputs of our plug-in.
I should mention first that our plug-in
is just drawing a square with an
image in it and colorizing the image.
So the inputs we need are x and y for
the position of that square on screen,
as well as the color to
modulate the image with.
And finally, we need an image.
Now let's look at the actual
implementation of that file.
By default, Quartz Composer,
the project template in
Xcode already has OpenGL,
CGL macros at the top.
So you don't need to bother with
that if you have actually forgotten.
So same thing here.
We define a nice name and a
description that's going to
go in there in the attributes.
Attributes for property port with key,
exact same thing like we saw before.
Check for each of those keys and return
an appropriate set of attributes.
Execution mode, that's the difference.
Remember, we have to be a consumer
to be able to render.
We don't depend on time,
so it's still known.
Then to make the code clear,
I deleted all the methods that
were actually not implemented.
So we're only left with one,
which is the execute method.
So let's rapidly look at it.
The first thing we do is we retrieve
the OpenGL context to draw with.
And for extra safety,
we check to make sure it's not null,
because I should have mentioned
before that when you actually use
CGL macros and CGL context is null,
you will crash.
So you want to make sure it's not null.
Here, for convenience,
remember it's-- when you
access the image many,
many times, you might as well cache it in
a local variable rather than
read from the input property.
So that's what I'm doing here.
I am copying the image on the
input into an image local variable.
And now it's time to
get to the real thing.
So what we want to do is we
have an image as an input.
We want to get an
OpenGL texture out of it.
If this image exists,
and if we can successfully get a texture
representation of type rectangle here,
then let's just put the texture
name inside another local variable.
Otherwise, we put zero.
Then we set up our model
view to do the translation.
And remember, we have to save the
previous model view matrix.
If a texture does exist,
if we do have a texture,
then we configure the texture unit
in OpenGL to enable texturing,
to use the texture corresponding
to the texture name.
And if we need a texture matrix,
we just load it on the
texture matrix stack.
We're almost there.
One more configuration we need
to do is set the current color,
so we can get-- remember,
input color will contain
a CG color ref object.
So we can get the components out of it,
and it's guaranteed
to be RGBA components.
So we retrieve them, and we can directly
set the current color,
which we don't need to save,
because it's one of the few stats
that is part of the current stat bit.
Everything is set up.
At that point, we're ready to draw.
So we draw a quad,
specifying the four vertices of the quad,
as well as the texture
coordinates for each of those.
Because we know the texture,
we actually load the texture
matrix that is provided to us.
We don't need to deal with rectangle
texture coordinates and specify the
coordinates in pixels or anything.
We just specify normalized
coordinates for the texture,
like 0 and 1, and it just works.
So if you were to change the
constant above here to be 2D
instead of rectangle-- you
would just replace it there,
and it would still work.
You wouldn't have to
change that code here.
Finally, our quad is drawn,
and we do the inverse operation,
restoring the previous stats.
So if there was a texture name,
we unload the texture matrix.
We restore the original state of the
texture unit by disabling texturing.
And we restore the model view matrix,
and finally check for OpenGL errors.
And don't forget to unlock the
texture presentation at the end.
So it might seem a bit complex.
But all of that is OpenGL code.
The real QC code is very simple.
Let's build a project.
Okay, let's run.
Yeah, should be installed.
Just double check.
Yes, it is.
Create a new document.
Look for our brand new Square patch.
Create an instance of it.
As you can see, X,
Y color and image inputs.
So let's take an image.
Okay, and I can obviously change the
color and the position as well.
So that was a simple demo of how you
would implement OpenGL rendering.
Well,
obviously you would start from that and
then replace with your own OpenGL code,
however complex it is.
Let's go to the -- oh,
before we go back to the slides,
I wanted to show you a more complex
plugin that I wrote the other day.
So it's a hide-fill plugin that does
a lot more complex GL operations.
But the QC side of things
is still very simple.
Let me open that composition here.
So what I have in that plugin is,
we start-- well,
let's look at the composition,
and then I'll explain
what the plugin does.
So we start with the video input.
We get the image out of that.
Then there is a custom
Core Image Kernel that extracts,
computes the luminosity
out of that image.
So you get basically a grayscale
image representing the luminosity.
Then we have another image kernel that
is going to take the luminosity and build
a new image where the RGBA components,
instead of representing colors,
are representing vertices.
So R maps to X, G maps to Y, and so on.
So you get an image where the
color components are actually XYZW,
coordinates of vertices.
So we're building just a mesh
of vertices stored in an image,
in a way.
And what happened is,
we take that special type of image,
and it goes inside-- well,
here I have a trackball so
that I can rotate-- but inside,
it's basically passed to the
custom patch I was talking about,
height field.
And here inside,
you have some fairly complex
GL code that is getting that image,
copying it into an FBO,
then going from the FBO to a VBO,
and basically processing
a mesh of vertices.
So the whole operation from
processing the video captured
frames to building the vertices in
real time to generating the mesh,
it's completely done on a GPU.
It doesn't leave the mesh.
It leaves the GPU.
So that's fairly advanced OpenGL.
And that is to show you here that you
can really leverage the Quartz Composer
environment to do complex GL code,
where you don't have to
deal with all your stuff.
Like, now I need to write some code
to capture the video input,
I need to write some code to
import images and create textures.
You can leverage all those
facilities provided by Quartz
Composer to do fairly advanced GL.
So you can kind of see it here
that it's basically-- well,
I need to rotate it,
but you might see my face in the mesh.
There we go.
So it's a mesh of about 16,000 vertices
and a bunch of triangles as well.
Here you see on the bottom left the
result of the first Core Image Kernel
that is computing that luminosity and
here you can see that special image
where RGBA are actually vertex positions
in a kind of normalized in a 0 to 1,
0 to 1 space in X, Y, and Z.
All right.
To learn about advanced
OpenGL techniques like this one,
I would recommend you definitely
go tomorrow to the GLSL session.
Now it's time to look at the final
part of writing custom plug-ins,
which is using internal settings.
The idea behind that is you cannot have
a plug-in where necessarily all the
inputs and parameters needed by that
plug-in are defined through input ports.
For instance,
you write a custom plug-in that is
going to access some hardware device,
and you might have a number of
parameters for the configuration
of that hardware device or the
way you communicate with it,
and you simply don't want to have those
settings available on the inputs because
you don't want them to be animatable or
it might just not make any sense at all.
In that case,
you have what we call internal
settings for the plug-in.
And the way people are going
to be editing those is by going
through a custom interface,
which appears in the
inspector of the editor.
So in that schematic drawing here
you can see the RQC plugin which
gets some values from input ports,
produce results,
while the internal settings are set
from the inspector and the communication
between the plugin and inspector
happens through key value coding.
So how exactly do we
implement internal settings?
Typically,
you would define IVARs in your class,
or even better,
Objective-C 2.0 properties.
Then you make sure those are accessible
through key value coding-- remember,
value for key, set value for key.
You also need to list the keys
corresponding to those internal settings
by implementing the method PluginKeys,
which return an array
containing those keys.
We need that list of keys,
because then we can do a
number of automatic things.
Like for now,
we do automatic serialization of
the values for those settings.
But we can also do in the
future automatic undo,
redo, those kind of things.
Here's an example of internal settings.
It's the same subclass that
I had earlier in my slide,
except I added two Objective-C 2.0
properties that you can see at the
bottom to store my internal settings.
In that case, I have a system color.
So just--it's completely arbitrary
for the sake of that example.
So an NSColor, you know, kind of thing,
and another one that would be
a completely opaque object,
and let's call that system configuration.
We need to declare the
corresponding keys,
system color, system configuration,
when implementing the
Plug-in Keys method.
Now how does serialization work?
Well, remember, you have your plug-in,
you have your internal settings,
and obviously when the user creates
an instance of your plug-in and
then save the composition file,
you want those internal
settings to be saved,
and you want them to be restored
when the composition file is loaded.
Well, we do that automatically for you as
long as the object you return for that
internal setting complies to NSCoding.
If it doesn't, you will have to override
SerializedValue for Key and set
SerializedValue for Key methods,
which basically are used to convert
an arbitrary object into a value we
can store in the composition file.
And that has to be either
nil or it has to be a class,
like NSString, NSNumber, and so on.
Here's an example serialization still
leveraging our previous class interface.
Remember, the first one we had as an
internal setting was system-color.
Because it's an NSColor type of object
and it already conforms to NSCodding,
there's nothing to do.
However, for the second one,
that special configuration
object completely opaque,
well, it doesn't conform to NSCodding,
so we have to handle the
serialization ourselves.
So we override serialize value for key,
check for the appropriate key,
and for the sake of the example here,
I'm assuming that this object
can return some kind of just
binary data of its representation.
So we just return that.
It's an NSData, so it's PLoS compliant.
We're fine.
Then on the other way,
when the composition file is loaded,
setSerializeValueForKey is called,
and we need to override that,
check for that custom key,
do the opposite operation.
We got that kind of data object,
so we recreate a configuration
object from it and set it.
Now, the user interface,
how does that work?
Well,
you are going to create an NSView with
a number of controls inside to
edit those internal settings.
And it's displayed in a
settings pane of the Inspector.
This NSView is going to be
managed through a QCPlugin
ViewController instance.
So the controller,
it's your usual model view
controller mechanism in Cocoa,
is going to act as an intermediary
between the plugin instance,
which is the model, the view,
which is your view full of controls,
and the controller in the middle,
the QCPluginViewController.
And it also handles all the loading of
the Nib file and those kind of things.
The way you return the controller
is by implementing that method,
which has to return a brand
new controller object for
your plug-in instance,
and it's called createViewController.
Typically, you would not subclass
QC view controller,
you only need to do that if you want
to do some fairly advanced things.
But for now,
I'm assuming simple case-- just return
an instance initiated from self,
your own plug-in instance,
and as well as providing the
name of the Nib file to use.
Now the Nib file,
how is it going to work?
Well, we use Cocoa Bindings
to simplify our life.
So whenever possible,
your controls are simply going to be
Cocoa bound to the plug-in settings.
So using the plugin.xxx,
where xxx would be simply the key
corresponding to the internal settings.
If you want to use the more--
the kind of the former target
action communication model,
it's completely doable.
You would just have to subclass
QC plugin view controller.
So practically, how does that work?
We start with our QC plugin.
It returns a QC plugin view
controller which is going to
communicate through KVC to set
and read the internal settings.
That plugin view controller is
loading a Nib file and it makes itself
the file's owner of the Nib file.
Then the plugin view controller as
the file owner has a view outlet which
you need to connect to a view in your
Nib file that contains all the controls.
And finally,
all those controls use Cocoa bindings
bound to the QC plugin view controller.
And that's pretty much it.
So in that final demo,
I'm going to quickly build some kind
of simple text thing where you have
the ability to enter a long text
in the interface in the inspector
of Quartz Composer editor and then
this is just produced as an output.
Okay, new project.
In this case I'm going to use another
template which is the one which already
provides support for all the UI.
We need files and everything
and let's call that simple text.
Alright.
[Transcript missing]
Which will be the string that
we-- the text and the string
that we actually produce,
so output string.
And my internal setting is going to be--
[Transcript missing]
Now I can go to the implementation file.
So, simple text,
I'm going to change here.
Usual attributes, so let's do if key.
Alright, default name,
and I'm just going to retrieve...
I forgot to copy that...
All right, name key.
Execution mode, processor,
nothing to do here.
Time mode, still not in it.
So remember,
we have an internal variable,
an internal setting that
is storing our text.
So let's give it some default value.
This internal setting is stored
using an Objective-C 2.0 property
and when your class is dialogued,
your instance is dialogued,
you need to set it to nil.
If you don't do that,
then it will basically leak.
And you cannot release the
text because it's a property,
so you just set it to nil,
which will trigger, you know,
replace the property by the nil
value and release the previous
string that was stored in there.
To plug in keys,
remember we have to list our keys here.
We have only one, r with object, text.
We don't need to change the serialization
because NSString conforms to NSCoding,
so nothing to do here.
CreateViewController is
already all implemented for us,
nothing to do.
And the only method we
actually care about is execute,
where we do output string.
So we do it very simply,
we take the text that we have internally
and we copy it to the output string.
We're almost done here.
The last step we have
is edit the Nib file.
So the templates provide a Nib file
that's already ready with a view.
You can just put your control on.
The view is already,
the file owner is already configured
to be of class QCPluginViewController.
Its view outlet is already
connected to the NSView,
so everything's pretty much ready.
Let's add an NSTextView.
configure the NSTES view
to not have multiple fonts.
And let's see, small sliders,
there we go.
And finally,
we're going to bind the content
of the NSTES view to the
internal state of our plugin.
So we make sure we select the actual
NSTES view inside the NS scroll view.
Then we go to bindings.
The value here is going to be an
NSString if the NSTES view does
not have multiple fonts enabled,
which is exactly what we want.
So we bind to the file's owner,
which turns out to be our
QC plugin view controller.
Then the key pass is going to be plugin.
Then at that point,
we retrieve the plugin instance.
And remember,
the internal setting is text.
That's our internal setting.
So we just bound the contents of that
NSTES view to our internal variable.
And the last thing we need to do here
is make sure it updates continuously.
So let's save that and build it.
All good.
Make sure it's in there.
It is.
Simple text.
Let me hide that.
Hide this.
Quit this.
Okay.
And now I have a patch that's
conveniently pre-populated.
So this patch is-- sorry,
this composition has an imagery string
and applies some bloom effect on the
text before displaying it on a billboard
so you get a nice kind of look.
And let's create the
instance of our simple text.
Oops.
Oh, I might have to quit it.
Yeah, it's there.
Simple text.
Pierre-Olivié Latour: Here we go.
It wasn't loaded, I guess.
Connect to the string input.
So now I have my initial value,
which if you remember was Bonjour.
What becomes interesting is
I can go show the inspector,
go to the settings pane,
and now I have my text
view with the text.
And I can type some text here,
and it's all real time.
So do a nice thing with the effects,
you know.
I can save the composition, quit,
and reopen it, and a text is there,
which shows that serialization
worked perfectly fine.
Back to slides, please.
So that was all for the advanced
Quartz Composer session,
pretty intensive context.
Remember that there are many
advanced features you can
leverage out of Quartz Composer.
Quartz Composer is definitely more
than just to do pretty motion graphics.
You can do pretty
professional work with it,
especially if you leverage the
advanced feature of the QC view or
use the QC renderer to integrate
into your own imaging pipelines.
And when you reach the
limits of Quartz Composer,
the Composition Loader will
allow you to build pretty complex
compositions by dividing them into
sub-composition and a master one.
Or you can even write your own patches.
And we've said it's not that difficult.
All the basics of writing your
own patches is really simple.
So you just have to, in a way,
put your code for the actual patch
in the pre-populated templates,
and you're good to go.
Thanks for coming.
I don't think we have
obviously time for Q&A.
The one thing worth noticing
is that we have a number of
labs regarding Quartz Composer.
There will be Quartz Composer folks
at the lab tonight starting at 6:00.
Our official Quartz Composer
lab is tomorrow at 3:30,
so there will be a number there.
And finally,
I would like to remind you that we
have a great developer mailing list
called QuartzComposerDev@list.apple.com
to which you're welcome to subscribe.
Thanks.